Our skin is the first line of defense--
a coating of keratinized dead cells--
a dry, hostile desert, where no pathogens can survive.
Should viruses, bacteria, fungi, and the sort accumulate on our skin,
then the dead surface cells simply slough off daily,
and with them, shedding off anything that may have stuck to them.
This protective coat of keratin armor is constantly replenished
as the lowermost keratinocytes of the epidermis
continually divide and provide new layers of cells
that are pushed up to the surface.
Yet, when we are injured, when we experience abrasions and cuts,
or when we get wounded, our protective armor is breached.
And pathogens can gain access to the soft tissue underlying our skin.
These pathogens however are in for a surprise
as they encounter special cells ready to counter-attack.
These cells, elite members of our innate immune system, are resident macrophages.
I mentioned previously that our leukocytes, white blood cells,
can be divided into phagocytes and lymphocytes.
Macrophages are phagocytes that reside in every tissue of our body,
just waiting to intercept any intruder looking to cause trouble.
When macrophages encounter bacteria and viruses,
they engulf them and basically swallow them up.
Inside the cytoplasm, the phagosome, as it's called,
the membrane-coated pathogen, fuses with lysosomes--
lysosome vesicles.
Lysosomes contain an arsenal of enzymes that kill,
and completely digest and break down whatever the macrophage has devoured.
The question is, how do macrophages identify the enemy?
How do they know that the intruders are foreign?
How do they recognize what is edible?
Obviously, this is a really important and fundamental point
that we need to answer for our immune system in general.
Much of how the innate and adaptive immune systems work is based on the ability
to distinguish between foreign intruders and our own cells.
The immune system must be able to discriminate between self,
the cells and components of our body,
and non-self, that is, foreign intruders.
For this, macrophages have special receptors on their cells,
on the membranes, that recognize foreign patterns,
which are molecules and structures  typical of bacteria and viruses in general
and clearly distinct us from them.
These structures constitute Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns, or PAMPs.
PAMPs, for example, can be unique structures of the cell walls
common to many bacteria.
Lipopolysaccharide, LPS, is such a classical PAMP.
These molecules are made of lipid and sugar,
as their name implies, and are part of the cell wall of many bacteria.
When special receptors, called Pattern Recognition Receptors, or PRRs,
bind LPS, for example, they sound the alarm and tell the macrophage
that it has encountered a foreign invader
and sends the macrophage into an eating frenzy.
Bacteria can move about and are able to do this
using special flagella, whip-like structures that propel them forward.
The flagella are made of unique bacterial protein called flagellin.
And, yes, flagellin is also a PAMP.
PAMPs, specific for viruses, also exist.
As we learned in the previous lessons, viruses often have RNA genomes.
Double stranded RNA and other virus unique DNA and RNA structures are also PAMPs.
that can trigger innate immune responses.
So there are many molecules and structures, PAMPs,
that seem to be common to pathogens.
Our innate immune system is not able to specifically distinguish
between the different species of bacteria--
to differentiate between Escherichia coli or streptococcus or Klebsiella,
for example, or discriminate even between flaviviruses,
such as yellow fever and Zika, or even tell Ebola apart from influenza.
However, by focusing on common PAMPs, the innate immune system
can clearly identify intruders as foreign and targets that must be destroyed.
This ability is based on the fact that our innate immune system
is armed with an impressive collection of PRRs.
These receptors are sensors that are able to recognize PAMPs.
One particularly important family of such receptors
are the TOLL Like Receptors, the TLRs.
These receptors are so important and their discoveries so surprising,
they led to the Nobel Prize in medicine just a few years ago.
I've asked Professor Bruce Beutler to tell us about his discovery of TLRs.