Imagine the following situation.
You've been infected by a virus.
Virus particles are cruising around looking for a susceptible cell to infect
before they get spotted by a B-cell.
As they hover over the cells,
cell surface proteins sort of float laterally
here and there within the membrane.
At some point, the virus may encounter a susceptible cell
and latches onto its receptor.
Membrane fusion takes place, releasing the viral capsid into the cytoplasm.
and the viral spikes just float away.
Viewing this from above, the membrane of the infected cell seems totally normal
and nobody is any wiser.
Who could guess that this cell
is actually a ticking time bomb, that soon the infected cell
will begin spewing out a new generation of infectious particles.
This is exactly the challenge the immune system is faced with:
how to detect infected cells and knock them out
before the viruses have a chance to replicate.
The exterior of infected cells can appear seemingly normal.
And so long as the viruses lay low,
you might assume that there's no way to discriminate them from a healthy cell.
Here's where things get interesting.
It turns out that our immune system comes with a quality control department.
All the cells of our body have a special monitoring and alarm system.
When normal proteins are newly made in our cells,
a few copies of each are taken as samples.
The protein sample is processed by the proteasome.
Remember Professor Ciechanover?
The proteasome cuts the protein sample into small pieces,
short peptides, about nine amino acids long.
These are then loaded onto special proteins called MHC.
The MHCs act as reporters, shuttling the peptide samples of newly made proteins
from the cytoplasm to the cell surface.
Thus all the cells of our body continually display
peptide samples of newly made proteins they produce,
loaded on MHC reporters, all the time.
We have mentioned numerous times
that the immune system distinguishes between self and non-self.
One part of this is that the peptides displayed on MHC
are constantly being examined by our T-cells.
T-cells accomplish this via their T-cell receptor, the TCR.
This special receptor can recognize the short peptides presented on MHC
with exquisite specificity and precision.
The TCR's are trained to recognize all the peptides derived from our own proteins,
that is, self proteins,
and distinguish these from anything foreign.
Our ticking time bomb.
When infected cells begin to produce viral proteins,
samples of these are taken up by the MHC reporter
and are displayed on the surface of that infected cell.
T-cells, scouting out the cells of our body looking for bad guys,
are pretty much relaxed and laid back and indifferent,
so long as the peptides displayed on MHC represent familiar self proteins.
However, as viral proteins begin to accumulate in the infected cell,
more and more of the MHC reporters display virus-derived peptides.
The T-cells see these foreign peptides and thus recognize targets for action,
infected cells active in producing viral antigens.
Diffusing the time bomb is of essence,
and relies on the expertise of our well trained bomb squad.
The T-cells bind the MHC's of the infected cells,
and release special enzymes that eliminate them
without causing damage to the neighboring healthy cells.
T-cells are, in fact, an effective SWAT team,
able to recognize ticking time bombs
and diffuse them before they go off
and cause harm to the surrounding tissue.
Now, in the last unit I mentioned that viruses have tricks of their own.
Some viruses have developed methods
that interfere with the cells' MHC reporting system.
These viruses block the shuttling of MHC
so that no viral peptides make their way to the surface of the infected cell.
At first, this seems rather devious, and infected cells just might go unnoticed.
However, here comes a special lymphocyte of the innate system,
natural killer cells, called NK cells.
These are special lymphocytes designed to wipe out any deviant cell.
As we have just learned, one characteristic feature of healthy cells
is that they constantly present MHC reporters.
Cells that lack MHC on their surface are perceived by NK cells as deviant,
and so are fair game.
The NK cells bind to them
and like T-cells release special enzymes that kill these cells.
NK cells are pretty crafty and have other means to knock out infected cells.
The NK cells, like macrophages,
are armed with receptors for the antibody effector signals.
So if by chance a virus encounters a B-cell before it infects the target cell,
antibodies can be produced, that are specific for the viral spike protein.
When cells are infected by the virus,
these express the viral spike proteins on their surface.
The spike-specific antibodies can now bind those spikes
expressed on the surface of the virus infected cells.
These cells are now antibody tagged.
When antibodies bind to the cell surface spikes, expressed on infected cells,
the NK cells home in on the effector signals
and surgically knock out the infected cells,
leaving the neighboring healthy cells alone.
In the next unit, we'll see how antibodies,
their effector signals memory, along with special sentinel cells,
work together to help us.
We will also see that boredom is never good.