We've been studying the molecular biology,
the virology of coronaviruses,
in animals and humans,
SARS, MERS CoV2.
And so now, I would like to focus a bit on the disease,
on Covid-19.
Now I'm just a scientist
and so I've asked a colleague and a friend of mine,
Galia Rahav, who is the president of infectious disease,
of the Sheba Medical Center,
the largest medical center in Israel,
and has been on the front lines,
from the very very beginning,
to help us and talk about Covid-19 as a disease.
Galia, it's great having you here.
We've all experienced flu, common cold
and we've been told by some people,
that covid-19 is just another type of flu.
Yeah- What would you respond to that?
I don't agree at all,
you know, it's really quite different diseases
and I think that there's several points.
First of all, you know that with Corona,
we have a lot of asymptomatic carriers.
You know it took us some time to realize,
that about third of the patients are symptomatic
and at about 60% really catch the disease,
from asymptomatic carriers
and in influenza so we don't have it.
It's very interesting that we don't know,
in influenza, that we know for so many years,
how many people are really asymptomatic.
Not a lot, that's for sure.
Now another difference between the two diseases,
is the seasonality.
You know, influenza you have it only in the season.
You have it in the winter and in summer you don't have influenza.
In corona, you have it all the time.
So the seasonality really is quite different.
Now you know also in,
although you know in influenza,
you have a lot of antigenic drift, antigenic shift.
In corona you have the variant,
but you know I see, now we have two years
and see how many different variants
and different response to vaccines, etc.
So it's also different.
Now, the numbers are totally different,
you know in Corona we know now this,
2 years more than 6.3 million died.
In influenza,
in a year, estimation you know,
respiratory diseases and not all of them are influenza,
about 650 thousand cases.
So you can't you know compare them.
So it's really quite different diseases.
So in reality,
Covid-19 is different from flu,
especially in various aspects,
like it transmits asymptomatically,
that's really important.
And we also see that it's prone to variation.
But on the other hand, both diseases,
flu and Covid-19,
are respiratory diseases,
so I would expect,
that there are some similarities in the clinical presentation.
On the other hand, you mentioned the fact,
that they are distinct and unique in Covid-19.
Can you contrast the two diseases, flu and Covid-19?
So Covid-19 is very similar to influenza,
you know fever, cough, shortness of breath,
myalgia you know, muscle pain,
sometimes arthralgia, very similar.
However, there's some unique manifestation,
that we don't have any influenza
and this is the loss of smell and taste.
Then, about 12 days later,
there is activation,
the virus activates,
you know all the inflammation system,
all the cytokines and causes, you know,
what we called cytokines storm
and also the coagulation system,
that cause a lot of thrombi.
And here we see a lot of what we call multi-organ disease.
We see, you know, cardiac failure, myocarditis.
We see CNS disease,
like a Encephalitis, Guillain-Barré,
we see kidney failure, we see really multi-organ failure.
In coagulation we see,
thrombi or much more micro thrombi, all over the body.
In Autopsies we have seen a lot of thrombi, micro thrombi
in the lungs, in the kidney all over the body.
So, in addition to a respiratory disease proper,
we're seeing a lot of other manifestations
and other organs and so on.
Yeah- and what about, temporally, long Covid?
I must say, you know,
we have to separate long covid to two,
quite different diseases.
One, I call residual disease and residual disease,
for example, a patients who are in the intensive care,
with covid pneumonia
and mainly patients who where ventilated
and they have a lot of damage to the lungs
and they have fibrosis of the lungs.
And sometimes they need respiratory rehab
and sometimes also they need lung transplant.
So that's something else,
if you had really covid pneumonia,
severe covid pneumonia,
you probably will have some residual lung disease.
Now in about 10% to 50% of patients,
they have you know,
different symptoms and signs that we can't,
you know, attribute them to specific pathogenicity
and we called it long covid.
And here we see patients mainly with fatigue,
extreme fatigue,
shortness of breath, that we can't find with all the tests,
if we're doing x-rays,
CT scan, lung function test,
excusitis, we don't find anything.
Pneumonia, like tachycardia, that is not explainable.
Dysphagia, you know I had several patients after corona,
severe pain or severe difficulty in swallowing,
we see a lot of cognitive problems.
Brain fog, many patients really complained,
that they're not able to concentrate, to memorize.
And also a lot of pain, muscle pain.
And we don't find anything.
So Covid-19 influer very different.
Let's now compare Covid-19,
with previous coronaviruses SARS and MERS,
how do they differ?
It's very interesting because SARS in 2002, 2003,
their where about 8,000, 9,000 cases.
And the mortality rate was about 10%- Exactly.
In MERS, only 2,500 cases,
with mortality at a rate of about 36%.
And I think that the main reason is that,
you know, in SAR and MERS,
there are no asymptomatic carriers.
And asymptomatic carriers, cause really a lot of transmissibility.
You know, SARS and MERS,
when you're sick, you're contagious.
If you're not sick, you are not infective.
So, all the infection control measures,
where much more effective in MERS and SARS.
You are doing desolation, no transmission.
Now, undoubtedly the most effective preventive measure,
has been the Covid-19 vaccine,
it's been a total game changer.
On the other hand,
there have been various concerns about adverse effects.
Can you tell us a little bit about myocarditis
and how worried we should be?
Okay so first of all,
because you know,
so many millions of people got vaccines already,
so for sure you'll see a lot of things,
that are not related to the vaccine.
So it's very challenging to know,
if a side effect is really related to the vaccine itself,
or you have it because so many people were vaccinated.
So myocarditis,
yes it is a side effect of the vaccine,
because we really did a lot of work with the Ministry of Health.
And we found that yes,
we have more at myocarditis following the vaccine,
then we have without the vaccines.
However, we see it mainly in young men- Why?
Nobody knows why, but you see it quite more in males,
in young,
not children but younger men- 15 to 20?- Yeah, exactly.
And you see it mainly following the second vaccine,
not so following the first vaccine
and almost all of them are very mild.
You were one of the first to actually treat Covid-19 patients,
in Israel, a new disease.
Was there any source for information,
advice from the world,
that helped you in treating our Israeli patients?
I like this question.
You know, I'm thinking back two years ago,
it was really so challenging.
And, you know, I can't forget,
because we treated the first patients in Israel.
And everybody looked at me, how to treat the patients?
I have no idea, how to treat a disease, a new disease.
And you know, my best friend was the Twitter,
really, and MedRxiv, this really,
you know until the corona I wasn't on Twitter.
Cool, and over the time and the experience gained,
has there been any major shift,
in the way you approached Covid-19 patients
and treat them?
In the beginning,
we treated only hospitalized patients.
And you know, we have antiviral drugs,
we had then anti-inflammatory drugs
and anticoagulation drugs.
And I think that the most important thing,
was really to kill the virus,
because if we'll kill the virus,
we'll prevent also the cascade of the inflammation coagulation.
And now the main change,
the main difference that to happen now is,
you know, shifting the treatment from hospitalized to out patients.
In out patients we three platforms.
We have what we call pre-exposure prophylaxis- Okay.
We have post-exposure of prophylaxis and treatment.
And the pre-exposure prophylaxis is,
what I mean, healthy people who are at risk
and preventing getting the disease.
So one thing is for sure,
the older vaccines and that everybody gets.
And then what we call monoclonal antibody, the evusheld,
now a days we are giving it to high risk patients,
mainly immunocompromised patients,
who are at risk for severe disease
and they are not exposed, they are healthy,
they didn't have corona and we are giving them,
the monoclonal antibodies of astrazeneca,
every six months to prevent of becoming infected.
And these antibodies are directed against?
They're directed against the spike protein,
but against several different- Epitopes- Epitopes, exactly.
And so we have the pre-exposure,
now we have the post-exposure.
The post-explosion prophylaxis,
if somebody, for example,
have you know, a husband, a wife or kids that are infected
and he's at risk and he's not infected yet,
so to give him also monoclonal antibodies.
The monoclonal antibodies that we can't give now,
for post-exposure prophylaxis,
are not effective against the Omicron.
They where effective for the Delta, for the Alpha,
the Regeneron and the Balma of Eli Lilly.
So they are not effective anymore.
And treatment, early treatment,
and early treatment, that's very important nowadays.
We are administrating treatment,
for patients with mild to moderate corona,
who are at home, out patients.
And they are at risk of developing a-
So what is the basis of the treatment?
Their are two new, relatively new medicines.
One is what we call Paxlovid
and Paxlovid is a protease inhibitor
and a very good study in New England found,
that it prevents hospitalization and death in 90% of patients,
which is very good- Which is great.
However, the problem with the Paxlovid,
a lot of drug-drug interaction, a lot.
So really we have to sit with each patient,
to see if there any drug-drug interaction.
So you shouldn't just randomly take Paxlovid?- No, no way.
And the other one is Molnupiravir,
which is a polymerase inhibitor.
And Molnupiravir, the studies show that it's effective in 30%,
its not 90%, but its okay, 30%.
And there is no drug-drug intercation.
And we don't have yet,
you know Pfizer and MSD should have studied together to see,
like in HIV- Sure.
That you have to take a combination, the cocktail.
So I think they should do it.
As we sum up, the horizon is obviously great.
But how close is the horizon?
When are we going to be relieved from Corona?
I don't have a crystal ball,
so I really don't know, I have no idea.
Are we progressing or are we before a more severe wave?
First of all, we have the vaccines,
I think that vaccines did great really,
are very effective,
even in this Omicron wave,
although the vaccine was not so effective against infection,
however, against severe disease and mortality,
it was and it was shown already,
it was very effective.
So the vaccines are effective,
however, they're effective for 6 months, who knows.
And now everybody say, okay, you know,
about third or half the world was infected with Omicron,
so maybe we have immunity,
but now we know that neutralizing antibody
and even the T-Cells,
are not so effective against the Omicron,
even though you where sick.
So, we don't know if we will have another variant
and what will happen, so I really don't know.
We have a good weapon.
It's the vaccines, it's the new drugs.
However, the virus I think is more clever and more rapid,
than the human- Yeah, still on the war path.
So Galia, I want to thank you very, very much.
It's really been important and interesting for us,
to get a perspective,
from somebody who is in the front line,
treating patients and dealing with the families.
Thank you so very much.