Let's recall.
The active ingredient of traditional vaccines
is the viral proteins in one form or other,
killed virus, live attenuated virus
or simply purified subunits spike protein.
Remarkably, the Covid-19 pandemic
brought about a genuine vaccine revolution.
Novel messenger RNA vaccines
based on 3 technological innovations
developed over decades.
First, let's look at the target immunogen,
the viral spike protein.
Back in 2013,
Barney Graham, working at the NIH on respiratory syncytial virus infecrion (RSV),
show the trick for a successful vaccine
was to stabilize the RSV spike protein
by strategically mutating specific amino acids to proline.
Proline tends to introduce local rigidity in the protein.
In 2015, Barney applied this approach to MERS CoV,
introducing two consecutive prolines
to stabilize the MERS spike protein.
So, not unexpectedly,
the moment that Yong-Zhen Zhang
posted the CoV2 genome on Twitter,
Graham lost no time,
and within a month designed and then produced
the DNA version of a CoV2 stabilized spike
ready for testing.
Now, in parallel, a new technology was evolving,
a technology that took over 20 years to get it right.
The idea was to use RNA as the vaccine delivery system,
opposed to DNA or protein.
RNA was hoped to be especially advantageous
as it would enable the production of target proteins
directly in the cytoplasm,
without the need for nuclear transcription,
as would be the case for DNA based vaccines.
In order for RNA to work,
it would need to comply with the format
of native messenger RNA in ourselves.
Messenger RNAs contain in open reading frame, the actual message,
which is flanked by two untranslated regions.
The 5 Prime UTR
is preceded by a 5 Prime cap structure
and contains a ribosome binding site.
The 3 prime UTR ends with a poly A sequence.
Producing synthetic messenger RNA was feasible.
However, when synthetic messenger RNA was injected into mice,
it caused a ferocious, out of control, innate reaction.
As you may recall,
RNA is a potent PAMP,
recognized by TLR3 and TLR7,
which lead to an intense interferon reaction.
Here is where Katalin Kariko and Drew Weissman,
working at the University of Pennsylvania, solve the problem.
In 2005,
they discovered that by replacing the uridine of RNA
with a modified base pseudouridine,
our body would accept the foreign messenger RNA
and not set off an alarm
and safely translate the message into viral antigen.
Thus years before the emergence of CoV2,
Kariko and Weissman had already fine tuned the use of messenger RNA
as an efficient vaccine modality.
Finally,
the last problem was to deal with the fragility of RNA.
How to deliver the RNA in such a fashion
as to protect it from degrading and breaking down.
Peter Cullis, working at the University of British Columbia,
provided the answer.
Cullis had been working for decades on liposomes,
droplets of fat, that can be used to package drugs
and be injected into our bodies.
The trick was to figure out the best combination
that would be most effective in shuttling RNA
into our cells.
Cullis came up with a concoction of 3 lipids
plus a unique ionizable lipid,
that together formed a lipid nanoparticle
that could be used to package and deliver the messenger RNA.
So, here we are,
3 technologies,
antigen design and stabilization,
RNA modification to enable messenger RNA vaccination
and lipid nanoparticles to package the RNA.
Each technology, the result of decades of research
and perfection by hundreds of investigators,
all come together as CoV2 emerges.
All you need now, is to manufacture the vaccine
and approve it for use.
Fortunately, two relatively young companies were already active
in developing RNA based therapies and vaccines.
BioNTech, established in 2008
and Moderna, founded in 2010.
Both companies immediately developed
lipid nanoparticle package messenger RNA,
coding for stabilized CoV2 spike protein,
which in months, after publication of the viral genome,
were already in Phase 1 clinical trials,
and by the fall of 2020,
the results of phase 3 trials demonstrated
efficacy of the vaccine.
Moderna and BioNTech
who had partnered with Pfizer, had already begun production.
The FDA in the United States, gave emergency use approval
of the vaccines and people began to get jabbed
as early as December 2020.
Timing is sometimes everything.
3 Technologies developed over decades
were ripe and ready as CoV2 emerged,
and so, a new vaccine modality was designed,
tested, manufactured and deployed,
all within one year.