Close your eyes.
Now, imagine,
it's the summer of 1920.
The world is just coming out of a fourth wave
of what will be known as the 1918 Spanish Flu,
1/3 of the world population was infected,
a half a million Americans died
an estimated 12 million deaths in India.
A total of some 50 million casualties
due to H1N1 Influenza.
At a time when there were no antivirals,
in fact, no antibiotics, and certainly no vaccine,
it took two and a half years
for the virus to take its course
and transform into a milder variant,
eventually reduced to common seasonal flu.
Now, consider where you were three years ago.
Who could have imagined that you would experience
a global pandemic of equally gigantic proportions?
So, how well have we fared?
What have we learned?
Are we better prepared for the future?
What challenges still lie before us?
Covid-19 has proven to be much more than an illness.
The pandemic has totally turned our lives upside down.
We assumed that everyone,
governments, leaders and civilians,
have acted only in good faith,
with good intentions in mind.
Clearly, however, in hindsight,
we have made some serious mistakes.
Lockdowns, isolations and quarantines,
shutting down schools, closing airports and theaters,
cancelling concerts,
public gatherings, weddings and funerals
have all been imposed.
It is still not clear how effective these policies have been
in the long-term management of CoV2.
In the short-term,
these actions have flattened the curve of infection
and certainly curb, at least momentarily,
the spread of the disease and so definitely saved lives.
But, how will the last year or two,
of kids having to learn via Zoom,
effect their education,
their psychological well-being
and their development of social skills?
These are serious concerns that for the moment
remain unanswered.
The use, and abuse, of social media,
the spread of fake news and conspiracy theories,
false prophets preaching wild cures,
such as injection of bleach or unproven miracle drugs,
have led to an infodemic,
too much information which is often misinformation.
Covid-19 vaccines are truly an amazing technological accomplishment.
Their efficient deployment, however,
has been complicated, riddled with surprises,
conjecture and false claims.
The single most disappointing fact
is that although the vaccines are profoundly effective
in preventing hospitalizations and deaths,
they do not seem to prevent infection and transmission.
Traditionally,
we've come to expect that a vaccine jab
followed by a boost will provide lifelong immunity.
With covid-19, even after 4 injections,
people still get infected.
The Anti-vaxers have claimed that despite all safety testing,
one cannot rule out hypothetical long-term side effects,
that may develop years from now.
Arguments have been made that RNA in itself
is dangerous and has never been used before in vaccines.
To answer these concerns,
suffice it to understand
that there are many RNA containing vaccines,
7 of these are routinely given to kids under the age of 2,
all contain replicating RNA.
Attenuated forms of polio,
rotavirus, measles, mumps,
rubella, flu and hepatitis A,
all contain full-length RNA genomes,
all infect ourselves
and all replicate to effectively illicit protective immunity,
consequently, saving billions of lives
and have been used for over 50 years
and none are associated, none,
with any long-term side effects.
One major mistake intended to sway policymakers
was the Great Barrington Declaration,
the concept
of simply letting the virus take its course without intervention.
The naive belief that this would lead
to effective herd immunity through natural infection.
Promoters of this concept did not anticipate
that natural immunity wanes overtime
and recurrent breakthrough infection is common.
In addition,
the emergence of ever more contagious variance of concern
would require ever higher
percent of the population to be infected
to achieve effective herd immunity,
at the cost of unimaginable numbers of deaths.
And, although, the idea was based on the fact
that the elderly suffered most,
who could have anticipated long covid
or PIMS
in many of the younger people who get infected.
Clearly, Covid-19 has taught us much,
but there are numerous challenges for the future.
CoV2 has taught us a lesson of humility.
The idea that coronaviruses are genetically relatively stable
and not quick to change due to ExoN proofreading
has led to some complacency
and difficulty to accept that viruses generate
and select variant after variant
with evermore transmissibility.
We need to develop more effective vaccines
to elicit mucosal immunity,
possibly via a live attenuated nasal spray vaccine.
We must strive for greater vaccine equity.
We need to better accept that pandemics are global,
affecting all countries and Nations,
poor and developed.
Everyone needs to have access to vaccines.
Everyone has the right to be protected.
We must understand that safety
will only be achieved when we are all safe.