The smallpox and polio vaccines contain complete viral pathogens,
all their proteins, as well as their genes.
This approach to produce vaccines against bacterial pathogens is also possible.
However, bacteria compared to viruses are pretty big
with large DNA genomes that code for thousands of proteins.
Let's take whooping cough for example.
This serious respiratory disease is caused by the bacterium Bordetella pertussis,
which is made of some 2,000 proteins.
A whole cell vaccine has been produced by killing the bacterium with formaldehyde,
in the same way Salk prepared is inactivated polio vaccine.
The whole cell pertussis vaccine
has saved and continues to save millions of lives around the world.
However, sometimes young kids have strong annoying reactions
to this whole cell vaccine, developing an inflammatory response:
redness, swelling, severe pain, and fever,
which as it turns out can all be avoided.
Scientists systematically studied the pathogen
and mapped out the specific proteins that directly mediate the disease process.
These can be used to produce a subunit vaccine
made exclusively of only these few, but most relevant, proteins.
It turns out that only 5 out of 2,000 proteins of the pertussis bacterium
are enough to train our immune system
and provide protection against whooping cough.
And as anticipated, this subunit vaccine
has markedly fewer and less severe side effects.
This approach of generating subunit vaccines has many advantages.
First of all, it focuses our immune system
to the most sensitive and critical targets of the pathogen.
It reduces unnecessary numbers of proteins
that do not provide any protective advantage,
yet contribute to unnecessary inflammation.
Subunit vaccines themselves are never infectious,
and thus, are especially safe.
This approach of subunit vaccines has also been applied for toxic proteins,
toxins that infectious bacteria produce.
The two most famous bacterial toxins for which vaccines are administered routinely
are tetanus and diphtheria toxins.
These vaccines contain tetanus and diphtheria toxiods.
These are the bacterial toxins inactivated with formaldehyde.
So, think about it.
The triple vaccine, DTaP,
given to protect our kids against diphtheria, tetanus, and whooping cough
doesn't contain even one infectious agent
and no more than a handful of harmless proteins.
As it turns out, subunit vaccines can be very effective for some viruses as well.
When we review the replication cycles of viruses
we learned how cells are only susceptible to infection
if they present the cell surface viral receptors.
Thus, scientists have developed subunit vaccines
that contain only one protein of the virus, precisely that protein that is crucial
for receptor recognition and binding to mediate entry.
A case in point is the hepatitis B vaccine.
The vaccine contains just one spike surface protein of the virus--
a relatively short protein of about 200 amino acids long.
Moreover, the surface antigen is produced artificially in baker's yeast cells,
so the vaccine has no trace of viral DNA, no unnecessary proteins or lipids,
yet affords protection by training and focusing our immune system
to effectively inactivate and neutralize the viral spike protein.
The most recent subunit vaccine used today protects women and men from cancer.
Human Papilloma Virus, HPV, is a naked, double-stranded DNA virus
whose genome codes for 8 proteins.
One of these designated L1, which makes up a major part of the viral capsid.
This single protein produced in yeast constitutes the entire HPV vaccine.
No DNA, no extra proteins.
Finally, when the pathogen's antigens are not proteins,
subunit vaccines can actually be better the nature.
You recall that bacteria are sometimes slippery
and hard for macrophages to engulf.
Antibodies directed to the slippery, outer surface of these bacteria
enhance macrophages eating efficiency.
The problem is that the slippery coat of bacteria
is sometimes made of polysaccharides, complex sugars.
Here is where scientific ingenuity has paid off.
Whereas the natural bacteria are somewhat resistant to our immune system,
we can outwit nature and engineer their coat
to become improved, excellent targets for B cells.
If we chemically attached to the sugars some proteins as well,
the sugar antigens become remarkably more appetizing for B cells.
These artificially mixed antigens, conjugates of protein bound to sugar,
are able to stimulate the production of antibodies to sugars
and provide efficient protection against the otherwise slippery bacteria.
This is exactly how the vaccines against Haemophilus influenzae
and Streptococcus pneumonia are produced.
The vaccines contained the capsular polysaccharides
conjugated with particularly tasty proteins
that together stimulate B cells to generate highly effective antibodies
that when the time comes
enhance the ability of macrophages to eliminate these bacteria.